and so i think grit was part of my
upbringing and i'm actually really
grateful for that because i think as an
entrepreneur probably the most important
attribute is not quitting
and getting through just rejection after
rejection
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's episode is a re-release of one
of our first guests that we were lucky
enough to cross paths with leila janna
layla lost her battle to a rare form of
cancer earlier this year leaving behind
a legacy of long lasting impact layla
dedicated her life's work to not only
advancing her own unlimited potential
but inciting others to do the same for
the nearly one year commemoration of her
untimely passing we want to take this
time now to honor leila janna
thank you for being here it's awesome to
be a guest on this show thank you so
much for having me oh man absolutely my
pleasure
man going into your world you're really
a vanguard for something really new
that's happening in
entrepreneurship which i've
felt like i've i've been sort of that
transitional generation where i wasn't
as
like clicked into things as you were
right from the jump i went through the
chasing money phase and all of that to
find how sort of desperate and horrific
that ended up being emotionally
before i found something that was more
about like what's the ultimate impact
but walk us through so i know that
things didn't start out necessarily easy
for you walk us through the the dark
times that you had in your 20s and how
you ended up
creating a social movement that's also
financially powerful
sure um well my parents are immigrants
they came here in 1978 with two
suitcases i literally feel like i lived
the american dream my brother and i went
to public schools we had jobs i started
working when i was 12. i started
babysitting in the neighborhood and and
i always had to hustle and i watched my
parents do it as soon as they got here
my mom had a degree in english
literature from india nobody would
recognize it so her first job here was
chopping onions at the local wendy's and
they had to struggle and so i think grit
was part of my upbringing and i'm
actually really grateful for that
because i think as an entrepreneur
probably the most important attribute is
not quitting
and getting through just rejection after
rejection and most of the really
successful entrepreneurs i know will
tell me just how many people rejected
them along the way so if you can have a
thick skin around that it's actually a
huge asset for me it was it was tough as
a
as a child i was always kind of an
outcast
we never had enough money to shop at
normal you know clothing stores
we didn't have tv at home so i was kind
of a weirdo on the playground
i was a big nerd i read books all the
time and did science fair competitions
and i really found my refuge in
academics and
was really passionate about school and
so got lucky enough to get into harvard
but didn't really have the money to
attend so i would i would cobble
together different jobs i did in fact
clean toilets for our campus we call it
dorm crew but it's like a janitorial
service run by students
so it's funny to imagine that at one
point i was literally like scrubbing the
[__] off of the rich kids toilets
[Laughter]
however i i do think that a lot of that
kind that kind of work is is truly
character building i remember that
summer i would literally calculate the
value of everything i purchased
according to how many toilets it would
take me you know to clean to purchase
that and i and i think it gave me this
frugality and discipline which i then
brought into my entrepreneurial career
it's really interesting because my dad
used to make me take
um
like hard labor jobs and either as the
family so before i could work legally um
we used to go on these like wood
shopping expeditions we would literally
drive up to the mountains growing up in
tacoma like i don't know if you could do
this or you just did it but we would go
and find fallen trees and you cut them
up and stack wood and you'd spend all
day doing that and you do that several
times in the summer and then when i was
i had to work in a door factory and so
and you you can't imagine the rage that
filled me with i was so angry with my
parents and i used to have to carry
lacquered trim
and i was getting arm hair by that point
and it would stick in your arm
and there's like no way to get it out so
oh i would be so angry like pulling it
out and my dad kept saying this is going
to build character this is going to
build character and how do you so and i
totally agree with you and that has
served me immeasurably in my
entrepreneurial journey
why is that like what what is one thing
you don't think people understand like
if they're about to start their first
company what do they not see coming for
them and how can they if they didn't
have parents that
somehow put them through this hard
knocks like how do they toughen up
that's such a good question and i know
there's a new book out on grit there's
all these new studies on adverse
childhood experiences different from you
know in the case of your parents or mine
you know adverse childhood experiences
are worse that's if you had trauma or
some kind of abuse in your background
what they find is that people who have
endured hardship in some way can build
grit and resilience from it cheryl
sandberg talks about this in her in her
book option b about this idea of
post-traumatic growth
and using something that's tough as a
growth experience and and so i find this
fascinating because i think
for me you know i i too hated my parents
for forcing me to do some of that and i
also just was frustrated i mean i
remember feeling surrounded by the rich
kids and feeling like i was never going
to fit in
i think if you didn't have that kind of
a background
one of the ways that you can push
yourself to get beyond your comfort zone
i think it's to read about failure and
try to immerse yourself in more case
studies
that show you how failure can profoundly
shape you and
it's hard i mean in the early days of a
startup i think rejection is inevitable
so there's an element of just getting
back up again when you've been punched
so many times that you feel like you
can't and and i don't know what it is in
us that is that that creates that sort
of tipping point when you decide to get
up again but it's among all the
entrepreneurs i know who are successful
that is the single biggest factor it's
not not quitting
you talked about having scar tissue from
growing up and you you
maybe downplayed it a little bit here in
your book and in some of your talks
you've talked a lot about like
not having the tv parents with accents
always being because your parents were
moving you moved like an insane number
of times yeah 12 times so moving around
so much to stay in essentially wealthy
neighborhoods so that you could go to
the best public schools and that you
know kids can be really really cruel so
going through that and then coming out
of it i think that breaks most people
why didn't it break you what were you
saying to yourself mentally because i'm
sure at the time you weren't thinking oh
this is really going to make me a great
entrepreneur
you're just trying to get through it but
what were you telling yourself to get
through it
so it's interesting you brought that up
and there was um there was abuse in my
family and i've kind of come through a
lot of that in in recent years and also
understood how it shaped me and i think
for me my refuge was in helping other
people i started doing community service
in high school for me it was this refuge
maybe seeing people who had it even
worse than me put my own suffering in
context
maybe it made me feel like i could
somehow transform hurt and pain that i
was feeling into something positive in
the world you know looking back on it i
feel like maybe that was the original
impetus for me to do this work
i ended up going to ghana when i was 17
which was so random i got i got a
scholarship from a big tobacco company
of all places so big tobacco did
something you know great for me which
was to fund my
travel to west africa and this volunteer
program which i could have never
afforded to do i didn't have a trust
fund most people assume by the way that
folks who work in social impact have
like you know millionaire parents who
just can write them checks to go to
africa that is so not my story i mean i
was like hustling for my own checks i
actually literally had that as a part of
your intro at one point like if you
think this was a trustworthy thing you
um so the opposite of a trust fund so i
i use this money to go to ghana and um a
lot of people that my parents knew and
even people in my school were like this
is completely insane why would you do
that this is you know dangerous you're
going to be by yourself as a young
american woman in the middle of this you
know west african country
and i think i never would have done that
had i not been propelled out of my
comfort zone by what had happened to me
as a child
and i think it creates a sense for me at
least of of openness and receptivity um
and maybe vulnerability that i i might
not have had otherwise do you have magic
words for somebody who's going through
something similar but their response is
to close down it's not to open up
they're not being propelled forward
they're being held back because i've met
people that they fall into both camps
like really similar circumstances but
just diametrically opposed responses
like do you have the
the magic sentence that you know would
help somebody jump from closing down to
opening up
the only real power we have in the world
is choosing our response we can't choose
what happens to us we can get stuck into
situations where we are abused where we
are
not treated fairly
where any number of bad things can
happen and so the only
choice we can make is how to respond
and i find that that knowledge gives me
so much freedom because if something bad
is happening to me that i can say is
beyond my control i can say well at
least you know i have the power in my
response to show the world what kind of
person i am
and i can't tell you the number of
really interesting examples of
post-traumatic growth that we're now
cataloging people who've lost everything
people who've had their kids murdered in
front of them people who've had just
every
manner of hardship who are able to
choose their response and rather than
shutting down and you know getting more
and more depressed which is something
that you have to get through but the the
choice to take that painful experience
and mold it into something positive for
the world is i think the deepest kind of
healing we can have as humans and for me
i think part of what got me through
those tough times
eventually as i matured was the
knowledge that i had transformed that
into something good for the world
when you say that we're cataloging do
you mean humanity are you talking about
samosaurus
humanity okay i was like wow
because i you
the stories in the book are
unbelievable stories of transformation
like uh
reading them is
is cathartic in and of itself like you
get so excited or at least i do you i
got so excited about like the
possibility and what you're doing with
sama hope and like the ability to fund
the surgery and see how directly you're
impacting somebody i mean it's pretty
incredible
and so
really fast connect two things for me so
you said in your 20s that you went
through some pretty horrific
[Music]
depression and you said it got so bad at
one point i wasn't sure i was going to
make it out
which obviously is pretty scary given
especially what you've gone on to do
with your life and then how much of the
catharsis from that comes from the like
individual stories of the people that
you've touched i did struggle with with
pretty severe depression in my 20s i had
a year in college when both my aunt and
one of my best friends
committed suicide
and that came at the same time right
yeah it was my roommate um she was my
blockmate we were in the same like
rooming group
and we had very similar backgrounds and
very similar relationships their parents
and so
um and both my aunt and this young woman
were incredibly beautiful incredibly
bright like the least
you know you would imagine the least
likely to take their own lives and so it
was such a
such a huge burden to carry that and at
the time you know therapy and counseling
wasn't as known maybe as it is now and
there weren't very many resources so i
didn't seek that out
and at the same time that that was going
on i was undergoing tremendous financial
pressure my parents had gotten a divorce
and couldn't pay for school at all so i
was i was working three jobs and always
trying to hustle to make ends meet with
the full course load and then maybe to
add to that i would go and spend time in
africa so i did research in rwanda
literally working on this project with
victims of the genocide
who'd had you know i'd go there and
interview people with like machete
wounds on their head from this horrific
genocide talking about having seen their
children murdered in front of them and
so i didn't even understand the concept
of ptsd
and you know how if you're exposed to
people who've undergone serious trauma
you yourself can take that on so it was
just a hot mess actually
after these few years
and then and then i graduated and i
moved to new york city i took a
management consulting job just to be
able to pay the bills and hopefully
learn about business i knew i wanted to
create a business that would help people
and ideally a business that would hire
poor people and move them out of poverty
but it was tough times i was alone often
as a consultant getting up at four in
the morning on a monday to fly to some
random city and spent most of my time
alone in hotel rooms so it kind of all
added up and at one point just exploded
and i went through some very dark times
anyone who's been through depression
knows what i mean
and i guess what got me out of it was i
feel very blessed to have found a career
that nourishes me spiritually i feel
like when your core spiritual values or
your morality are aligned with what you
spend the majority of your time doing
it creates this
this i don't know this unity in your
soul and i feel like having that has
been such a cornerstone of my life it's
what i often go back to when i'm really
struggling or when i'm feeling depressed
i will literally like go back and read i
have a file in my gmail of inspirational
stories from our workers stories that
people will send me about their own
transformation or stories that managers
of our centers will send me and i
whenever i'm feeling depressed i'll go
back and read those just to to ground me
i also think that connecting with other
people who are suffering there's all
this research that empathizing with
someone else who maybe has it even worse
than you can relieve your own burden and
so as much as possible when i was in
those states i would try to immerse
myself in issues around global poverty
or understand what life was like for
someone who had it even worse you know
who might be struggling with depression
but living on two dollars a day and also
struggling with hiv or some other
problem and that would help bring me out
of it
you said that you have a
four-tiered process to
dealing with things i'm putting those
words but it was a four-step process one
of them was meditation
walking through the four that'd be
really fascinating but the one that i
found super interesting was your
brother's an astrophysicist
just crazy totally crazy and you said
thinking about nature thinking about
space like thinking about something
bigger than the human problems that i'm
struggling with is
alleviates that it's really interesting
to see that sort of reflected both at
the human level even just finding
somebody that's you know struggling
bigger than you and then even stepping
outside of that and seeing how small we
are and yeah you said you least looked
at the telescope at saturn
and it gave you the sense of like it
would lower your
stress and and pressure so what is that
four-step process sure um and i think i
might have forgotten i wrote this up um
i know there was meditation and
mindfulness the um the zooming out and
contemplating nature is so helpful and
there's now all this new evidence that
shows that um that when we spend time in
the wilderness the japanese call it
forest bathing there's a term for it
there are actually you know documentable
neuroscience benefits to that your brain
chemistry changes when you're exposed to
wilderness my own view is that we become
conscious of our smallness and how
irrelevant these petty concerns are day
to day you know like you'll be annoyed
about you know i often get annoyed about
something somebody said to me at the
office or some political thing that's
going on you know in my friend group or
some other issue i'm stuck in traffic
and i will forget wait a minute okay at
the end of the day
i come from stardust i will return to
being stardust
none of this matters at all the only
real thing that matters is is love
you know loving people and being loved
yourself and i think everything else is
kind of gravy so
so it's helpful to remind ourselves of
that and contemplating
vast expanses in space or for me it's
really the ocean i spend a lot of time
in the ocean as much as possible i'm
such a california person at heart that
really helps center me and remind me how
petty my concerns are actually i also
talk about exercise for me
various forms of exercise are totally
cathartic i'm really tightly wired and a
little bit manic and so i'm like a
little hamster if i don't get out my
hamster wheel energy it's probably going
to get scattered all over the place so i
i kite surf i do yoga i'm really into
dance i find rhythmic activity really
helps and and can be really soothing and
therapeutic and then i don't know if i
talk about this in that piece but but
for me therapy and coaching have been
hugely helpful i don't think we talk
enough about therapy i think that if
we're willing to hire a coach for better
sports performance why wouldn't we hire
a coach to have better emotional
performance and deepen and improve our
relationships what are some key things
you've gotten out of coaching like if
somebody watching right now
was was gonna take away a few key things
what would they be the biggest one for
me being like a hot-blooded passionate
entrepreneur is the concept of the pause
so
inserting a pause before you respond is
probably the most helpful thing for at
least for my relationships with my
colleagues with my partner with my
friends
i'm tempted always to run a mile a
minute and to respond immediately when i
hear something i i'm pretty quick-witted
i like thinking on my feet i have that
entrepreneurial hustle and so i'm very
tempted to just respond immediately um
the worst decisions i've made the worst
comments i've made
the most damage i've done to
relationships or in my companies has
been when i've responded that way and
not taken a pause
it's really interesting you actually
have a great story about this with the
guy that wrote in and said you're
destroying america you're outsourcing
all of our jobs to india
um essentially shame on you and you
wrote him the vicious email but you
didn't send it and then what happens
from there i'm so happy that you brought
that up um i will never forget joe from
ohio and he wrote this email because he
saw a psa that we'd done on hulu so i
literally like taken this footage on my
phone of these refugees who who we
trained in this horrific refugee camp
called dadaab in in kenya where people
are literally living in the most
avoidable suffering i mean it's just
tragic to see it and we'd shown these
refugees how to do digital work and they
were doing a pilot program with
microsoft which i thought was the most
inspiring thing here are these people
who are helping themselves not rely on
aid or charity and so we run this ad and
i get this email as soon as the ad
started running and i got it on in the
middle of a really tough day like we had
been rejected from another funder i at
the time was sleeping on my
ex-boyfriend's futon because i had no
money bless his heart remains a good
friend
and um and so i get this email and the
email subject line was you are ruining
america
and i felt so slammed by that because
here i am trying to help people it's a
non-profit i'm never gonna be like a
millionaire billionaire out of this this
business
and um and so my immediate response was
to dash off like a nasty like how dare
you kind of accuse me
email and then i slept on it and i
didn't send it best advice pause
the next morning i woke up feeling
really different
and i did a quick google search of ohio
unemployment statistics and found that
ohio had been very hard hit by the
recession this was back in 2009 and i
thought let me respond with compassion
so i wrote to joe and i was like dear
joe you know i'm sorry you feel this way
maybe you have a point do you have any
ideas on how we might adapt our digital
work model for here in the us i would
love to help communities like yours and
his response to my email was night and
day he wrote back and he said thank you
so much for your kind response i'm
really sorry that i said what i said i'm
just really frustrated i lost my job
recently i live in a community where a
lot of the factory work has gone
overseas and we're struggling
and eventually he kind of dropped off
the map but it did inspire me to go to
my board at samasource and say what
could we do to fight domestic poverty
how can we be an organization that's not
just siloed into attacking this issue at
the international level but maybe is
more thoughtful and creative about
applying it here
yeah i was really surprised by that so i
knew that you were doing things
internationally but i had no idea that
you had started and it's in rural
arkansas right now right along the
mississippi delta we started there and
we actually we eventually shut down that
branch of the program because it wasn't
working and i can tell you all about
that but it operates now in san
francisco and new york it's called sama
school whoa
so what is salma school now then so the
idea behind zama school is if you look
at the american economy it's very
different from the economy of say kenya
or uganda so the model that we have
working overseas doesn't exactly work
here it's a different it's a different
flavor here
here all net employment growth in the
last decade has happened in the
independent work economy so this is
contracting basically everything from
gig economy jobs like lyft and uber and
taskrabbit and field nation
to contract work for companies right and
and that has just exploded partially
because younger workers want more
flexibility in the jobs they have they
don't necessarily want to work on nine
to five for 40 years and then get a
pension at the end of it those jobs have
gone away so we developed the first gig
economy training for low-income
americans and what we're trying to do is
help modernize our workforce training in
this country which is so out of date
we're training people to do jobs that
went away a decade ago and are not
coming back
so we're our philosophy is why try to
oppose the trend let's understand this
is what's happening and so how can we
make the most vulnerable people in our
society successful on these platforms
wow that's
incredible
what do you say to people that say
you're a saint
they don't know me well enough
definitely not a saint
i just tell them also talk to my
colleagues and they'll they'll be
schooled
you know i have a passion for doing this
kind of work it's almost a selfish
passion because it makes me feel really
good maybe it's the feeling that other
people get when they go to church or
they do volunteer work for me this is
like
my
soul food
how did people respond you gave an
amazing speech which i'd love you to
recapture the the core thesis but you
gave a speech about how
mlk gandhi they're not
saints they're real people and
as you walk through that you led the
speech off by saying i'm about to get a
lot of uh
haters for what i'm about to say and
then you said some
i thought it was it made them more
interesting but what was your thesis in
that just that um
when we put people on pedestals as
saints we sort of we turn them into an
other we turn them into
um you know we we think of ourselves as
us and lowly and we think of them as
these saintly people who are just
somehow different from us and therefore
we don't have a moral obligation to do
the things they're doing because they're
uniquely equipped let's remind ourselves
that some of the most famous and
prominent social leaders were not
flawless mlk was a known you know
cheater he cheated on his wife regularly
unfortunately gandhi um it's well known
in india was really really cruel to his
wife there's even a play that i watched
about it which was kind of shocking and
i guess the the moral of the story is
that no one is a saint um you know even
when they're canonized
there's a there's a whole book that
criticizes mother teresa's work and i'm
not saying this to take down our heroes
i think that what all three of those
folks have done is truly heroic and
great and should be celebrated i see
this because it's important that we
don't absolve ourselves of a moral duty
to act we all have that duty to act you
don't have to be flawless
these people are not you know
genetically different um and i think
that's another problem with this
pedestal issue is that when we put
people on pedestals we then start
nitpicking and saying oh well if he or
she wears a nice dress and she can't
possibly care about poverty because
she's too consumed with her own
appearance or in mlk's case you know he
was many people tried to take him down
because he had such great i think a
great sense of style
those two things are not incompatible
you can have
you can have an interest in fashion and
a desire to make aesthetic choices that
fit your taste and at the same time find
poverty to be morally objectionable and
want to do something about it people who
do work in service of humanity do not
need to be saints we do not need to put
them on pedestals they don't have to you
know take vows of poverty i think when
we when we say that and do that it makes
ordinary people feel like they could
never enter this field and that's part
of the problem
yeah i love that like and that's one
consistent theme that i've seen through
everything you've written that you've
talked about um interviews that you've
done is like look i want to do good in
the world and i also want to be a badass
chick so
right like i want to roll up and do
something amazing and you said oh god
you were talking about humility and you
said look is elon musk overly humble no
and do we want him to be like what
judged me by my results not by my
attitude that's not the word you used
but it was like that was where you were
going with that what are your thoughts
around humility how we can leverage a
little bit of bravado to draw attention
to important causes i think it's so
important and i think again it's that
pedestal problem because when we put
someone on a pedestal we expect them to
behave you know like not human right we
expect them to behave like characters in
the bible or something and and as a
result we get extremely demoralized or
you know our whole image of them is
taken down when we hear that they spent
you know some amount of money on an
outfit or that there have been so many
takedowns of social entrepreneurs in the
media or non-profit you know do-gooders
for some reason maybe it's because
people assume that if you're doing good
in the world that you are a little bit
self-righteous and you're putting down
others there's a sort of a takedown
desire people have and i just feel like
that's unfortunate i think like there
are so many examples of truly corrupt
solely profit-seeking entrepreneurs
who've done far worse i think who are
under far less scrutiny
than relatively good social
entrepreneurs who you know are are
flawed humans like we all are
and and i guess my takeaway from that is
to is to try to be a little bit more
balanced in our assessments and look at
the bigger picture
yeah it's interesting i like that notion
of looking at the bigger picture of
really starting to assess and in fact
this is at the core of how you want your
non-profit to be judged is
what's the impact for the dollar spent
so
you've you've said like people will see
a non-profit or a lavish party and
they're like oh my god that's so scummy
like how can you be doing that but what
if in doing that they draw like people
that just pour millions of dollars into
something and it has a massively
disproportionate effect i think that's a
really powerful way to look at that and
i see
i'm actually interested to hear your
details but your move you have moved at
least with lux me into a for profit um
i've worked on the board of the x prize
talked to peter diamandis who i know you
know and about the frustrations of the
non-profit world and and i have chosen
so i like to think that what we're doing
in impact theory will ultimately have a
lot of social good
but for me it is absolutely like i
wouldn't even do it if i couldn't turn a
profit and i'm just being honest right
like you say whatever you want about me
i don't give a [__] like i want to have
lasting impact i want it to be
interesting for me and i want it to be i
want to touch the lives of hundreds of
millions if not north of a billion
people would be absolutely incredible
but i'm driven by both right and so to
pretend that i'm not driven by one
seems crazy also
there's so much power in being able to
be self-sustaining to not have to ask
anybody for anything quite frankly let
alone money
what made you transition into the
the for-profit world with lux me since
it's still so socially driven like what
does that look like it's so interesting
i think part of the problem is that um
especially here in the united states we
have a very bifurcated view of
non-profit versus for-profit right we
think okay for-profit means your profit
maximizing at the expense of everything
else which means that if it's going to
make you more money you will pollute the
stream you will use slaves in the supply
chain you will you know do any number of
things that are bad for the world right
and so we think okay the job of a
business is to make as much money as
possible and then maybe there's going to
be you know excesses that can get
donated at the end of the day and then
they get donated over here to these
non-profits which are generally cash
starved reliant only on grants and
donations and the whims of very wealthy
people to solve all the problems that
are being created by these you know
profit maximizing companies here that is
such a flawed system right the real
answers lie in the middle the real
answers lie in businesses that actively
try to solve a social or environmental
problem and do so sustainably and there
is a whole range of these businesses and
we're starting to see them crop up both
on the non-profit side and on the
for-profit side if you think about it
like the girl scouts sells hundreds of
millions of dollars of cookies each year
that's a very viable business right
organizations like goodwill and the
salvation army support a huge part of
their operations by giving work to
low-income people in their stores which
amount to hundreds of millions i think
goodwill's actually multi-billion
dollars in terms of of sales in their
stores and and we we don't think about
that as social enterprise but that is
where all the most exciting things in
social impact will happen
then i think about for-profit companies
like patagonia or method patagonia is
one of my favorite examples for-profit
company that has taken a huge
environmental stand protected you know
tons of acres of wild lands
donated you know
more than probably most companies have
to environmental groups and and that's a
for-profit company so so i think that
this
this bifurcated view we have of
non-profit versus for-profit is a little
bit old-school and and again it's the
conversions that's most exciting
all right so abstracting it for a second
from um
the social angle just in general about
entrepreneurship what have you learned
over the last 10 years which i imagine
is pretty legion
so best piece of advice i ever heard is
from ben horowitz don't punk out and
quit i i have the tattoo i have the sama
tattoo on my right hand but i almost
feel like that should be the other
tattoo because i think the most
worthwhile worthy things in life are
just the result of a lot of you know
painful
enduring failure
um and so so that's the first um the
second i think is um
i found that
the pause the like
not making rash decisions and i'm always
very tempted to make rash decisions i
have a million business ideas a minute i
have like a hundred domain names i own
like many entrepreneurial people i
constantly get inspired by things i see
and uh and being able to pause and
breathe before i make decisions is
probably you know saved me a lot of
heartache
and then and then the third is is you
know i get a lot of pr and a lot of the
fame and glory for building sama but
really everything that we've achieved
has been because of the people that took
the leap to join me i mean i can't tell
you how risky it was for our first
employees to like quit their normal
paying jobs and come work for me
i just saw one of them today at a book
reading she was the person who opened up
her east africa office and jen you know
would call me in the middle of the night
to tell me things like oh by the way a
ship dropped its anchor on the internet
cable heading into east africa so the
internet is down for the foreseeable
future we're an internet-based company i
mean crazy things like that would happen
and if i hadn't had jen on the ground in
east africa we wouldn't have succeeded
as a business so
so the team is everything i mean the
idea is great having a founder who can
go out and raise money and can be
charismatic is wonderful but you need to
have the team that can operate the
business day-to-day and
and sort of keep you in check and so
i've been very fortunate to have the
most amazing people who are willing to
quit much better paying jobs and
opportunities and come work for us and
what do you look for specifically when
you're hiring are there like certain
traits characteristics i'd say um so the
first is you know competence um so
i think that can be demonstrated in a
number of ways but usually it's pretty
easy for me to tell whether someone
knows what they're talking about they
don't need to have slides they don't
need to have a fancy resume
but i kind of get into the nitty-gritty
very quickly often what kind of metrics
do you look for to know if you're
succeeding in whatever you're doing
what would you know what did you do at
your prior company that you're most
proud of what was the biggest struggle
you had so i asked questions that try to
quickly get to whether someone's
competent to do that job number one
attribute the second i find for social
mission companies is to understand
someone's core motivation
how do you find that
i find that like most people who come to
work in social enterprise had a
transformational life experience i can't
tell you how many people will say
i had a parent who died or somebody
close to me became really ill or i
struggled with an illness or i battled
depression i had some kind of traumatic
or
serious life event that called into
question how i was spending my time
and that basically made plain
that i wasn't able to implement my value
system in my job and that created this
disharmony
and so many of our best people who've
been with us the longest are the people
who
had those kinds of
transformational life events and decided
to quit the job and do something
meaningful and invest themselves fully
and it can be so hard i think often with
social environmental impact companies
you're running the same race as
everybody else but you're like
deliberately handicapping yourself by
putting these additional constraints on
your business so to get through that can
just be so hard
it means you're often not getting enough
sleep because you're dealing with like
some worker issue in nairobi that a
normal company wouldn't have because a
normal company wouldn't hire people who
come from slums and who deal with all
these other issues and so so you really
do need to find people who are
exceptionally committed above and beyond
just the excitement of doing their job
exceptionally committed to the mission
and when you find those people who are
basically like missionaries for what you
do
i think the most satisfying thing for me
has been seeing people
invest as much or even more than i have
in the company and that was a real
turning point seeing people who were
willing to care more about about sama
than you know than i was at a certain
time and as an entrepreneur that's maybe
the the most satisfying feeling
what did that first i'll call it the
first year but it's really before the
company existed when you were trying to
get people on board because
one of the number one things i get asked
is like what's that first step how do i
get started i don't know anybody i don't
have money like what do i do how did you
overcome that like tactically yeah i
mean i think um another good piece of
advice is the side hustle
so i started the business plan for
samasource when i was working as a
management consultant and i started
working on it at nights and weekends and
just really because i was bored with my
consulting job and i wanted to do
something more meaningful i knew i
wanted to build a social enterprise of
some kind and so i read every book i
could i read every case study i could
get my hands on i learned about muhammad
yunus and the microfinance movement he
remains an inspiration to so many of us
in the field i went out and i watched
speeches done by other social
entrepreneurs and in this learning put
together this business plan and applied
for competitions online i just sent out
the business plan to there was a social
business challenge in amsterdam that i
found on the internet and i like
submitted the application and lo and
behold they called me i went to the
semifinals and i got one of those big
checks
i got 22 000 euros from that competition
and around that time i thought okay i
should quit my job and do this full-time
the next funding we got was from another
business plan competition i didn't place
first in either of them
um
and uh and that was another like
fourteen thousand dollars and i cobbled
that together and made that stretch for
over a year um in building and building
zamasu at the very beginning how did you
like how do you decide what books to
read what internet searches are you
doing i literally think people like they
they go okay
i've heard lila said i need to like go
see i need the speeches i need to read
books but what books what speeches like
where do they start yeah well um amazon
recommendations are actually pretty good
so yeah um yeah it's just awesome things
you'd already read
yeah so like if you if you like look at
what muhammad yunus has written they'll
suggest other books in similar
categories i personally found
inspiration from entrepreneurs i read a
lot of books about entrepreneurship and
the journey that people have taken i
actually published a book list
on my medium account if anyone's curious
with um
my 108 life-changing books pieces of art
and i think i even have some podcasts
and music on there
nice all right we'll have to check that
out in fact where'd just drop your name
into medium and then pop up and it'll
pop up all right perfect so you're
reading reading reading taking an
information but you don't stop there you
actually like put it into action do you
remember like what that first like real
tangible thing was that you did
yeah i mean i i was no stranger to the
hustle right so i think one benefit of
having immigrant parents is you're just
kind of used to taking action all the
time and i think almost to a fault i
have this paranoia about one day being
like out on the street and not having
enough money and not being able to
survive and so like i'm always i've just
always been doing things and
hustling so so when i had this
consulting job i knew i wanted to start
a social enterprise i had no idea how i
was going to afford it and then i
figured well if i get the money from
these business plan competitions and i
start winning some contracts and i
really economize and cut down on my
expenses and maybe i take a side
tutoring job that's what i did in the
first year of sama to keep things going
then i can at least have some semblance
of a business so
so i put this plan in place i remember
asking a professor friend i'd worked
with if i could get
some sort of access to the university
that he was teaching in he was teaching
at stanford and i was like look i i'm
not going to go to grad school but could
i get like could you make me a visiting
scholar or something so i have some
semblance of an official title so i
don't seem to everyone like i'm just
looney tunes and i've left my job and
i'm starting this crazy non-profit so he
gave me a library card i became a
visiting scholar at the stanford program
on global justice basically because i
asked and because he's a very generous
person
didn't come with any money but i think
it did help to be part of that stanford
community even from an emotional
perspective this was before the days of
co-working so it was quite lonely to
start something on your own and at the
time all my friends were joining
facebook as early employees um and uh
and it was hard it was like it was like
being homeschooled um when all your
friends are part of the cool high school
walk me through that that had to be
tough as your friends are early
employees of facebook they're making
dash like how did you deal with that
comparison so there was no like it that
wasn't part of the emotionally hard part
of starting is seeing people start to
make money even though it hadn't cracked
and become what we think of today but
um i imagine that wouldn't be too easy
as you're struggling to get this thing
off the ground you're struggling to make
ends meet people are writing to you
telling you you're destroying america
when none of this is for money
to like what advice do you have for
somebody that that's in the middle of
that path and they're looking at
somebody that took the more traditional
path it's easier maybe they've had kids
and they can support the family like
what would you tell them to hold on to
it was so hard at one point my best
friend who works in finance
took a month off between jobs and moved
out to san francisco just to be near me
because i think he was so worried this
was like in my low point
in my 20s that depression i referred to
um
for me what really helped was again
going back to the stories of the people
we were helping because it just provided
this sustenance i got one email one year
around christmas time from one of the
people who managed our work center that
was working with mostly women who came
from slums and she said lyle i just want
to tell you the story of this woman who
is a single mom and like what she's been
able to do for her kids and you may not
see it but i'm you know here in nairobi
i see this every day i cannot tell you
what a difference that you personally
have made in the lives of all these
people and i'm so grateful it was just a
simple christmas card and i wept when i
read that i so needed to hear that at
that moment i pinned it to my wall i
still refer to those kinds of letters
all the time
and and to me that's like that's worth
so much more than money you know i think
some people live their whole lives and
don't get that sort of satisfaction from
their jobs so i feel tremendously lucky
and grateful that i've been able to
build a career in this
and i think it's it's worth a lot of
you know compensation yeah no joke
so one of the most interesting things to
me in your story is actually back when
you were 17 when you go to ghana i
believe
um
[Music]
walk us through that so one time as i
was doing a live broadcast and people
ask questions and i answered them in
real time and somebody said you know
i'd like i want to do something with my
life what do i do i've been reading i've
been all this and i just lost my [__]
and i was like just [__] act would
you like for the love of god just go do
something
and
i said
if you've always been thinking about
going to africa and like doing some good
book a ticket right now today and go
tonight like stop thinking about it just
go
and of course the criticism was are you
out of your [__] mind you can't tell
people to just book a flight to africa
like you need immunizations if nothing
else like this is crazy town and and i
thought okay for sure but at the same
time like i would actually rather that
person roll the dice and take a risk and
go
than spend the rest of their life like
stuck in paralysis you're 17 like you
roll up not having any connections not
knowing where you're going or what
you're doing um how did you make that
work how did you find the courage what
was that all about um well first of all
it's funny because everybody was like
telling my parents oh my god you're
you're negligent your daughter's gonna
get hurt like rural ghana is probably
the safest place on earth like far safer
than urban los angeles
my neighbors as soon as i moved in were
just always taking care of me their
first objective was to fatten me up
because i said i was way too skinny i
would never find a husband if i
continued that way and so they would
like bring me excess you know cassava
and stuff from the farms i remember the
first day i got there this little girl
came running over with this plastic cup
and i looked at my host mom i was um
staying with this
this these grandparents actually
who did this work for fun basically they
hosted these foreign
volunteers and and so this girl comes
with this cup and she's got eggs in the
cup and she says something i don't
understand and looks at me expectantly
with this cup and i'm like why why why
is she giving me eggs and my host mother
explained she's like well eggs are a
very precious commodity here these
chickens often don't lay many eggs
because they don't have enough nutrition
and so she's giving you the most
valuable thing that her family has to
welcome you whoa so there was just this
incredible welcoming and generosity and
it made it so easy in fact my hardest
thing was coming back home i had culture
shock reverse culture shock going to
harvard from ghana where everyone was
super friendly and smiling all the time
and then get to harvard where it was
much like colder and harder to survive
and a much more like dog-eat-dog
atmosphere that is really interesting in
fact you have an awesome quote i'm
almost certain that i have the exact
quote here
i have molded my life around the fact
that work is the best way to move people
out of poverty and that work is at the
core of human dignity but it's not all
that there is
so in the context of what you just said
like
that's real that was jarring for me just
to hear you describe it about the human
warmth the human connection and then to
go to a place like harvard in you know
western civilization and to feel more
distant more disconnected and ultimately
then sort of that becomes the beginning
of the
the emotional distress that you go
through
like how do we reconcile that like what
are your thoughts around the the
disconnect of um the traditional western
lifestyle and the beauties that are
in these rural villages that you're
trying to to really help but you're
trying to help them with like these
western ideals that's pretty fascinating
i know and it's such an odd
juxtaposition because um you know i find
that some of my happiest moments are
when i have very little and i'm in a
place like rural ghana or one of the
places i love most in the world is rural
northern uganda which is just stunning
it's pristine i you know i've had so
many amazing experiences of just deep
connection with um with the land but
also with people
and i think there's a certain
vulnerability that comes from not having
a lot of stuff when you're poor you
depend on each other you depend on your
relationship with your neighbor and your
family because if you don't have that
you have nothing and when an accident
happens you know there's this social
capital that helps people
get through that and so
so it's tough because on the one hand i
think a lot of the traditional values or
a lot of the values that i see in poor
communities are values that we want to
perpetuate and um and that are important
and on the flip side there are things
like really you know avoidable suffering
in healthcare for example and i remember
talking to a doctor in kampala who would
tell me that he would watch people
routinely die in his hospital because
the hospital didn't have enough sutures
so people would come in from like an
accident on the street and they would
literally die from hemorrhage because
the hospital did not have stitches
so
that's the kind of thing that just
should never happen in 2017 not on our
watch right i also think that we're
learning more and more that
more money after a certain level does
not equate to more happiness or more
fulfilled life
this is one thing that i want to talk
about before we get to my final question
and that is your notion of untapped
potential
so i've
literally accidentally i can take
exactly zero credit for this in fact
going back to your notion of sometimes
being selfish ends up with really great
results to get extra credit i started
working in the inner cities around usc
so they say hey who wants extra credit i
was like a total freak for getting good
grades and so i raised my hand they sent
me into a school in south central to
first teach i was teaching oceanography
and then i got asked again who wanted to
do x credit me and they did one-on-ones
and that one-on-one relationship that i
entered into with this little kid named
rashaan
um
turned into an eight and a half year
relationship
just because i made him a promise that
i'd help with his homework and so like
it turns into this whole thing and like
i don't at the time have no concept of
this kid is changing me as a human being
like just at a deep and fundamental
level right but i don't understand that
i'm 19 whatever so
but it
leaves this indelible mark on my life
and then i go on my crazy
entrepreneurial journey
going through the periods of me
realizing okay i've been chasing money
and for me maybe not for everybody but
for me like i just was soul crushing
and so i needed to connect to something
again humanity people something like
when you were talking about that
juxtaposition of you know being in rural
ghana and then coming to harvard like
that's how i felt in the business world
chasing money versus like actually
connecting with people and i wanted to
connect and so
that ends up we create quest nutrition
out of that desire to connect and bring
value in all of that
but then
again unintentionally i find myself in
the inner cities because that's where
you can afford the real estate that's
where manufacturing happens because it's
zoned for that and then b you can get
hundreds of thousands of square feet so
of course you're drawing from a local
population
and here i am again with like these
these just incredible people and i used
to say
i'm mining for astronauts and i don't
know why that was just like the con to
me as a kid like an astronaut like you
could never be an astronaut right that
was like the unattainable dream
and i just thought these guys they could
be like they're they're just as smart as
me and i'll define smart as the ability
to process raw data at a given speed
right they could do it just as fast as i
could so i was like
it's purely my opportunities my mindset
that differentiates me
and you've talked about that you said
the problem isn't potential the problem
is opportunity walk us through that
and then what awaits us on the other
side when these people get to express
their potential sure um it's just as you
said talent is equally distributed and
opportunity is not
and
we live in a world where where
more than two billion people live on
less than three dollars a day and that
number is adjusted for purchasing power
so that's what three dollars buy you in
a u.s city in modern times
so just imagine what that means i mean
it means that you are living in a
constant state of scarcity we now know
there's a very interesting book out
called scarcity which talks about how
scarcity reshapes your brain
they took fortune like i think fortune
500 ceos and had a few of them volunteer
for a study where they were basically
voluntarily starved for a week and these
guys stopped being able to make good
long-term decisions universally because
your brain chemistry is focused on
finding food it's focused on whatever is
scarce and so when people are living in
a constant state of scarcity they cannot
possibly make you know what we would
think of as good decisions they are
locked into a state of suffering and and
not achieving their full human potential
that is just tragic and it's tragic not
just at the individual level it's tragic
in the sense of this is the greatest
natural resource we have in the world
more important than going to mars more
important than finding the next oil
reserve or the next diamond mine is
figuring out how we can mine the talent
of the bottom billions of people who've
been left to
fester
and i think it's a tremendous loss to
the world and so for me i think it's so
exciting to be able to go to places like
nairobi
or uganda and see people shine see
people who could easily be
astrophysicists if they had only had the
opportunity and hopefully get them on
the path where they can achieve more of
their human potential and it is the most
personally satisfying job i could ever
imagine having and i think as a society
when we do this we you know we feel more
satisfied collectively as well
yeah it's interesting i used to tell
people i'm looking for the next 100 1
000 elon musk's right and what does the
world look like when you have that many
people that can play at that level so i
totally totally get that all right
before i ask the last question where can
these guys find you online
lilajana.com i'm on facebook at lila
janna and then givework.org where i talk
about samasource and luxme perfect and
we'll drop that all in the show notes
all right
final question
this is a big one for you and it's it's
come out clearly in the interview but
what is the impact that you want to have
on the world
the world's largest 2000 companies spend
12 trillion dollars annually on goods
and services that's
dwarfing the budgets of international
aid and charity if we could direct even
a little bit of that money to sourcing
from social enterprises that give work
we could move millions of people out of
poverty very quickly without even
changing corporate business models
i think there's so much potential in
giving work not just at the individual
level not just us choosing brands that
do good in the world but in companies
choosing to source for goods and
services from these types of vendors and
that is i think the next evolution of
our mission i love it
thank you so much so much so
guys you're going to want to check out
this book it is absolutely incredible
the whole concept of being able to end
poverty one job at a time and giving
work instead of giving handouts is
absolutely incredible but what you're
really going to love about diving into
her world is that she talks about that
fascinating balance that she mentioned
earlier between really wanting to do
good being who you are bring the full
weight of your personality understanding
what's working in for-profit businesses
and bringing it and making the demand
that we can do it in service of a
greater good and that there is no
compromise you're not giving something
up by doing that and that was the thing
that drew
me into her world if you know me you
know my whole thing is results baby and
that is it that is the only thing you
should be focused on and from the jump
that's what she talks about you need to
be looking at the result that people are
getting out of these it doesn't matter
if they're an ngo it doesn't matter if
they're a non-profit or a profit you
need to be looking at the results that
they deliver how many people are they
helping what are they able to do with a
dollar and that's what's amazing to me
so you're she's lighting the world on
fire in two ways one she's creating best
in class companies and that is something
i did not ask her nearly enough about
when you dive in you're going to see she
creates products that people actually
want
products that people actually want she
solves problems and she does it in a way
that is humanity plus and that's it man
it is a new way of doing business and i
think she's a vanguard jump into it and
see what it's all about because it's
really [__] good all right guys if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary take care
[Applause]
you